Terminology.
There's a lot of like terms that people
around databases like to throw around.
And hopefully we can
demystify some of them.
Sometimes it's hard for me to even
know what terms I'm using cuz I'm so
used to hearing them so frequently.
So if I'm saying words that you
don't understand, just stop me so
that we can make sure
that everyone gets these.
So database is really just
a repository of data, right?
If you can imagine like a program that
you're writing you have like an object
that stores like your state like a Redux
store or something like that, right?
This is basically that just on a much,
much larger scale.
So instead of storing a hundred things,
you're storing a million
things billion things, right?
That's what databases can do.
These are meant to be giant scale things
that can scale across the entire world
that can have, resiliency and
store very important things on it, right?
That's what databases are for.
What's fun about them is that there
is a variety of different ways
that they can work and
it depends on what you want them to do.
So that's what I'm gonna teach you here.
I'm gonna teach you four
different kinds of databases.
That's why I chose these four different
databases that we are gonna be looking at
today is because these are exemplary of,
different types of databases.
It's actually funny I was working with
our artists to kind of come up with this
picture here.
And she was like, can you explain to
me a little bit what a database is and
I came up with this analogy and
then she loved it so
much she actually put it into the artwork.
And I asked her,
what's the best way to get from point
A to point B if that's only a mile a way.
If you have a bicycle,
you have a car, you have a boat, and
you have an airplane, right?
Well, I think the answer is, it really
depends what's in between the two, right?
If you're trying to get from one side
to the of Amsterdam to the other,
having a Ferrari is not gonna
help you very much, right?
That city is so
jam packed that having a bike is gonna be
the best thing you could ever want, right?
But if you're trying to get
from point A to point B and
it's the middle of the ocean,
you probably want a boat, right?
And so it depends on your,
your job requirements of which
vehicle you're gonna choose.
That's kind of the same
thing here with databases,
they're all gonna get you
from point A to point B.
But one of them is gonna
be significantly better for
the problem that you have, right?
That kind of makes sense.
So you can see here she kind of ran
with that there's like a NEO4J,
hot air balloon.
There's a Redis car,
there's a MongoDB boat and
there's an elephant cuz everyone
likes Postgres, elephants, okay?
So that's kind of why we have all these
different kinds of databases is cause
they're gonna work better for
different kinds of things.
So when you have these like
massive stores of data and
you wanna be able to get
certain resources out or
update or delete certain things, you
need some sort of query language, right?
Some things that you can hand to it and
say,
here's an action that
I would like to take.
And so all of these databases have various
different forms of query languages that
we're gonna have to learn.
So you're actually gonna end up learning
four different query languages today.
But most of them are intuitive enough
that you should be able to pick them up
pretty quickly.
Okay, so that's a database.
It's a repository for lots of data.
And then that's another good term to pick
out of there's query where I'm gonna be
using that term a lot.
It's basically just something that you're
gonna send to a database, some action or
request or something like that.
That's, a query.
Another good one to know is schemas.
So a schema is basically what's
the shape of your data look like, right?
So I had put an object in here.
If I have this object here that says name,
city and
state the schema of that data would
be the name and the city and state.
So I could have five different objects and
they would all have the same schema.
They would all have name, city and state
despite the fact that the values of those
would be different,
the keys would always be the same.
Another good way of thinking about that is
like think of a spreadsheet like Excel or
numbers or something like that.
The columns would be the schema
of your Excel spreadsheet.
And you'll notice I'm gonna refer to
Spreadsheets a lot during this course,
it's because a spreadsheet is a database,
right?
Of some variety, it's a way of
storing data in a structured fashion,
it's a database.
I've actually seen way too many people use
like Google sheets directly as a database.
So it's actually possible to
use a spreadsheet as one.
Not suggesting it, not teaching it,
but it is possible.
So schemas are important because
some databases like Postgres
are gonna require us to be
very strict about our schema.
We're gonna have to tell Postgres upfront,
here's every key that
I will ever give you.
And if you try and
give it another key, it's gonna be,
I don't know what to do with that.
And that just fails the entire
query altogether, right?
And you can contrast that against mango,
mangoes and be like,
give me whatever you want.
I don't care.
It's schemaless, right?
So we'll get more into that.
That's a word that you'll hear me thrown
around a lot in this course as well,
which is schema.
We're gonna be talking about document,
relational graph, and
key value store databases
throughout this course.
But I wanted to let you know that
there are actually a lot more than
just those four.
Those four might cover maybe I'm
gonna guess 90% of use cases.
But there are a lot of other ones
as well that you should know about.
One of them is search engines,
not like Google, but
more like something called like Solar.
Or Sphinx is another one that's really
popular that allows you to basically
create a search engine for your database.
A lot of these databases don't have
the ability to do what's called full
text search.
Which is to say, here is three words,
here's I wanna search for
local beer inside of my database needs to
span across all the different columns.
You do something like
a search engine to do that.
Some of them had that ability
just built in like Postgres and
MongoDB do but some don't, so
you'd use a search engine.
Another one is called wide column
databases, these are fairly
new type of database if you've heard
of what is it, Google's big table.
Google's big table's kind of the famous
version of a y column database,
another one is Apache Cassandra,
which is actually grew out of Facebook and
how Facebook stores all of their data.
I don't really totally
get how to use them.
So I'm not gonna spend a ton of time.
It's described as a two
dimensional key value store and
if that doesn't mean anything to
you doesn't mean anything to me.
So that how they describe it.
Message brokers actually might come back
and do another course sometime on message
brokers cuz I think it's really
important and really cool.
This is gonna be something like Kafka or
rabbitmq.
It's the ability to pass
messages between your programs.
I think it's really underutilized
by node developers cuz it's really
a really is conducive to
how to write node apps.
And then another one's
called multimodal databases,
which is a basically a database
that knows how to act.
Maybe both as a relational and
non relational database at the same time,
a good one is Azure, Cosmos dB.
That's the one that I work a lot with
obviously because it's an Azure but
another one would be like a Rango dB.
Those are multi paradigm cuz
they can work in different ways.
That's not all of them as well, but
that's probably like 95% of them.
Now that I've described to you.
But just go look at the Wikipedia
article of databases.
You'll see that there's
a ton of types of databases.
ACID, let's talk about that one for
a little bit.
So it's an acronym that gets
thrown around a lot as databases.
And I just wanted to make sure that you
understand why that gets thrown around.
It stands for
atomicity I think is how you say that,
the, the atomic nature of databases,
consistency, isolation, and durability.
And it's kind of like the qualities
that a database can have,
not all of the databases that we're
gonna be looking at today, have that.
And some of them do, but you need to
understand like the trade-offs that you're
making, when you choose
one of these databases.
So the first one, admittedly is
does this query happen all at once?
And so it's atomic in nature, so
it means you literally cannot divide
the query into multiple parts.
It is a single query.
That's important for
things like you can imagine big
bank tracks transactions, right?
If I'm gonna subtract $10 from my account
and add $10 to your account, you want that
to be one transaction because if that
happens in multiple transactions,
that means.
What happens if one happens and
then the server goes down?
I mean, someone lost $10 and
someone didn't gain $10.
So that means you lost $10 altogether,
right?
So you need that to be an atomic
transaction where the loss of $10 here and
the gaining of $10 here is
all one atomic transaction.
Does that make sense?
It ends up being extremely important,
these are called transactions.
So yeah that's really important,
you'll see it down here,
we'll talk transactions again as well.
The next one is consistency.
A good example is as you always have
multiple database servers running at
the same time.
So if I have five database servers go
down, and I have a sorry, if I have five
running and I have one go down, the other
four need to kind of pick up the slack.
And if your database isn't consistent,
that means that they're gonna
be out of whack a little bit.
So, you don't actually know
which one knows the truth.
And even worse,
you might actually lose data.
So if your main database goes down,
and you have four others and
they're lagging behind the main one.
That means you could lose data
in the process which again for
like banking stuff,
that's a disaster, right?
Someone could be losing millions of
dollars just because your database went
down at a bad time.
You'll notice a lot of these times
I frame this in terms of money.
It's because banks have been
really driving databases for
the past 50 years, right?
So a lot of these features exist
because banks have made them that way.
Isolation.
Isolation is just kind of, we don't
necessarily talk about this one as much.
But if you have a query that's gonna
be doing a bunch of things all at once.
It basically means that you
can run them concurrently,
so you can run the transaction broken
down into pieces, all at the same time.
Or it can run it serially.
So, do this one, then this one,
then this one, then this one, right?
And everything will happen the same way.
So it just basically means you
can decompose it into parts,
running it in different parts and
that's still gonna work okay.
And then lastly durability that just says,
if your server crashes,
you can restore it back to where it was,
right?
And that just means it's
writing to disk successfully.
And it's means your data is
durable to a crash, okay?
So that's ACID.
So if you hear database
described as ACID or
if you hear a query is described as
being ACID, that's what it means.
It means all of those
boxes are being checked.
So you might be thinking right now is like
well, I want everything to be ACID, right?
I want everything to be
totally done this way,
but the thing is you're
making a trade off, right?
ACID is safe, but it's slow.
If you're reading through these something
like durability means if your query is
durable, it means that it's not
only writing to the main server,
but it's actually going to be writing
out to all of the other servers and
they're all going to be writing to disk.
And that you're gonna have to wait for
all that stuff to happen before
the query is marked as successful.
That is very slow,
particularly if your database is
spread across the entire world, right?
So instead of waiting, five milliseconds,
you're now waiting two seconds for
your query to totally complete.
That might be worth it again,
if you're moving money around, but
if you're just updating a profile picture,
it's probably okay if that's not totally
consistent and totally durable, right?
There's acceptable loss in data.
So that's what I'm just saying is know
trade offs that you're making, know which
data is acceptable to lose, know what
data is totally unacceptable to lose.
And you're gonna have to make
choices on databases based on that.
Transactions the one,
I just wanna call this out specifically.
Sometimes one query can't accomplish
all the things that you wanna do.
So you're gonna have to send multiple
queries to do accomplish the thing that
you wanna do.
But again, you can't break it up.
Most of these databases, in fact,
I think all of these databases allow
the ability to do transactions.
Which is I'm gonna send you five queries,
but
I just don't want you to do anything
else besides those five queries, right?
So it actually makes those five
queries act as one query and
that's considered a transaction.
And you're just guaranteeing this either
all happens or none of it happens.
Because I can't have it partially happen,
right?
Which going back to the money thing, if
you're gonna take $10 from this account,
you must add it to this account.
Don't do anything in the middle.
I can't have that
inconsistency in my queries.
If you have a multi threaded database,
you're sending a query that can be
broken down into multiple threads.
That query needs to work the same way in
parallel it then if it ran sequentially,
which basically just means this query
needs to work the same way every
single time, no matter what you send it.
No matter how the database is processing
it, the query needs to work the same way.
That's probably a better way of putting.
And to be frank, I don't really understand
isolation as much because it's not
something you ever talked about.
It used it used to be important and
now basically everything checks that box.
>> So a transact transactions
relate to a person a all databases?
>> No transact transactions
relate to almost every database.
It's how's databases get around
the problem of I have a thing that
must be atomic, but I don't have the
ability to do this in one query, right?
It's like I have to say this
idea in one sentence, but
I have the grammar structure doesn't
allow me to do it one sentence.
Therefore I'm gonna be using semi
colon to get this into one sentence.
Does that kinda make sense?
So it's related o the A,
I guess you would use it to fulfill the A.
Yeah, okay, I guess they
are kind of tied to each other.